Goal two, enable the user to interact.
To tap that content, to tap publish,
to tap the like number 7 and change to 8.
Interact with the content they see and
change it.
Presumably changing underlying data,
otherwise it'd be inconsistent.
Otherwise, I could see the number
of likes goes from 7 to 8.
But under the hood, how many likes
are there actually changing?
Okay, sounds fine, but
this is where the problems begin.
Now you may or
may not have had this intuition.
And if you don't have this instinct,
then good for you.
But for me, when I look at a screen,
when I see the number 7 as
the number of likes on my tweet.
And I say to myself, I got to change
that to 8 by liking my own tweet.
>> [LAUGH]
>> Of course, okay, this is getting old,
but getting very old.
But when I do that, we just said
there needs to be data changing.
Otherwise what is it to say that
that number of likes has changed?
I remember when I first tried to build
an application when I was like 21,
22 following a tutorial.
And this was just so, so
hard for me to track.
And maybe all of you
didn't have this instinct.
But when I'm engaging with
something I see on the screen.
And I tap to like the number 7,
and it changes to the number 8,
like I just said,
there needs to be data changing.
And I'm like, yeah, I can see it,
there's a number 7, and now it's 8.
I can see it, it's number 7, now it's 8.
And that's a trick.
That's a trick by user interface engineers
to pretend that what I'm seeing is
what's changing.
Because what I'm actually
seeing there people, right?
That's my gone pen.
What I'm actually seeing there, people is.
Maybe I can show it here, I guess is.
Let's be more realistic and say,
no, no, okay, there it is, 7.
That's 30 maybe,
30 little on-off lights, right?
And then this is another 30.
When I click 7,
if I've gotta change the number 7 to 8,
This collection of 30
lights that I'm seeing,
the pixels I'm seeing has no
knowledge that is as number 7.
It has no knowledge of the number 7.
And I don't know maybe
you all got this already.
But when I see the number 7 on the screen,
and I tap it and it changes to 8,
I'm seeing my data change.
What are you worried about?
But actually, that would imply that
30 randomly ordered pixels, or
pixels in a shape,
that they don't know what they are.
Can become 30 other ordered pixels.
But these are two totally separate things.
I can't add one,
I can't add one to a shape of pixels.
Now you may be like, yeah, obviously.
But for me, when I see the number 7 and
I click on it and it becomes 8.
I'm confident I'm changing the data
of the number 7 to 8 right there.
I can see it,
[LAUGH] it's right on the screen.
And I'm not wrong for thinking that
because that is our nature from one year,
two years old.
The epistemic and
the metaphysical, been practicing
saying those words, are identical.
The epistemic is do I
know the pen is here?
I can see it, I tap it.
I can see it, I know it's there.
I tap it, and it moves.
All right,
what I see is the underlying data.
It is the underlying, when I see
if I have one pen and make it two,
now I have two pens.
I can see the two pens.
This sounds like-
>> [LAUGH]
>> It's like someone's raving
online [LAUGH] talk.
But I can physically see the atoms,
the underlying state of the world.
Which is where is this pen's atoms
in the universe, are reasonably.
Maybe we wear glasses, maybe we have,
to be honest, in a deeper sense,
do we really know?
>> [LAUGH]
>> But what I see roughly is what I get.
We learn it from two years old.
What I see is what I get.
And the job of a user interface
engineer is to try and
emulate that in a world in which
that is 100% not the case.
What I see, the pixels on the screen,
is not what I get.
That what I get is under the hood,
in the computer stored in memory.
What I see is 30 lights in a shape that
change into another shape of 30 lights.
I know that doesn't sound like that,
well, okay fine.
But that means there must be
somewhere else in the computer.
And again, maybe you all thought this.
But there must be somewhere in
the computer, there has to be data.
There has to be somewhere stored,
I don't know, likes of 7, not just so
that it's consistent, but literally so
that you can add one to it.
I can't add one to that,
I can add one to this.
So I can run code to change.
In fact, there's no way the user can
change what they see, which is what we
wanna be able to do, without changing
some underlying state of the universe.
In the real world, they're the same thing.
The state of the universe is the pen's
physical atoms are in this location.
And when I see is the reflection of those,
my epistemic, my knowledge is the same.
On the computer [SOUND] could
not be further from the truth.
The one that gets me on
that one was always like,
particularly games like Mario.
If I tap on Mario I know that
I am moving Mario to jump up.
Tap, Mario, and Mario jumped, no.
Instead, when I tap Mario,
I tap an area of pixels on the screen.
It sends a message to somewhere where it
says height is 10 units, for example.
Adds 1 to it, now it's 11 units,
pings back and says,
please paint those
pixels in this new area.
But I tap Mario, Mario moved, uh-uh.
I tap Mario, it sends a message saying.
Please change underlying state,
underlying data, underlying content,
the height of Mario.
And then from that new information,
display the pixels of Mario X
number of pixels further up.
May not be one, maybe 10, maybe whatever,
but yeah, there's underlying data.
So yeah, I add 1 to 7 and I get 8.
And now I can send a message
back to display the number 8 and
turn those into pixels.
Maybe you all knew that, I don't know.
For me, I just didn't get that.
But that means that for
anything the user sees to change,
there must be underlying data changing.
Otherwise, how is it even changed?
Pixels don't have any knowledge of
what they are, so they can't change.
But we've got a problem.
If that means data's got to change,
the fact that HTML is a one-time display,
we can never go back.
We run through this code one time,
and we never return to it.
So even if there were data, number 7.
Okay, great, how do I ever change it?
I can't, it was a one-time display.
Okay, let me just dwell on that, right?
HTML, we literally go through and
grab this code one time.
It is taken one time,
we do not return to it.
I checked, we definitely don't.
>> [LAUGH]
>> This is a one time display.
I cannot get back to it.
Which is why that question about
the error handling was like, yeah.
Cuz it's really that basic.
Now, to be fair, it can still have
error handling at that point, right?
It implies that it's really, really basic,
but it's wonderfully intuitive for it.
Okay, so
HTML is one time display of content.
Or sorry, put it more precisely,
one time addition of elements to the DOM.
But the DOM is a list
in C++ with real data.
That's real data.
So yeah, user can change what they see.
Yeah, yeah.
That's real data, and you know what,
users can change that data.
They better be able to.
Because users can change what they
see by taking action on the page.
Which given that this is a direct
description, in the DOM, every single
thing on here directly mirrors what's
on the page, that might make sense.
So let's have something written,
what's on your mind.
Let's say I'm writing, Hi.
That's all I have to write.
>> [LAUGH]
>> You're very nice.
Okay, that's going to
immediately add to my
C++ data structure, my list there.
Again, people,
just think this is a JavaScript array,
it just happens to be in C++.
All C++ engineer is gonna
add there the string Hi.
People, I just said that what
we need to do to have users see
change when they take action
is to store and change data.
Well, we're storing some data.
Well, in fact, we're changing the data.
That would therefore implicitly have
been initially an empty string, right?
And then they start writing.
And now there's a string,
it would be like empty string.
They write that at H.
Now there's an H here.
Then, right i, now there's an i
in here in this sort of element.
This would literally be an object.
For example, the property,
I don't know, value and Hi.
In C++,
they're changing the data stored problem.
Well, let's see.
I think it says here.
Typing the input field changes DOM data,
changes C++ data from empty string to Hi.
However, we can't run any code
ourselves on the DOM in C++.
If only we could.
People, if we could run code on
this position in C++, my God,
life would be a lot easier and
also more risky all at the same time,
>> [LAUGH]
>> But a lot easier
as well because we have a full
dynamic store of data here in C++,
capturing all the content on the page.
Unfortunately, we do not get to write
any code in C++ in the browser directly,
and people ask me why.
It's I think combination, it's not
unusual for applications that enable
you to write code, the application
that does the parsing, interpretation,
and compiling or some sort of compilation
stage of that code, to be created in C++.
Right, that's just
the heavy lifting language,
which you can then have other
programming languages execute with it.
And that's not unusual.
But I think it is unusual for
them to be so set.
I would put it also down to no one
expected the web browser to be building
out highly complex user interfaces
with thousands of elements,
thousands of views of interactivity.
They thought it was gonna be a bunch
of text with a few clickable links.
That's what they thought.
And so they never imagined that this DOM
they built in C++ being only intractable,
well, initially by HTML to add stuff to
it one time, was going to be a problem.
To the point that you remember the first
ten years of the web browser, so
maybe 95 to 2005, was all about trying to
let real applications be built within it.
Maybe you remember Java applets, those
things you downloaded that were all Flash.
These were all efforts to recognize,
you know what, in the web browser,
this ain't a proper
development environment.
So let's try and develop.
And then I think it was probably Jobs
who said, Steve Jobs who said no.
And that's where we've ever since
had a growth of frameworks,
frameworks that try to work
within our existing structure.
And make it more like a traditional
application developer environment for UI.
So we can affect our data, change it,
basically go from an empty
string to a full string by typing,
by the using action.
However, we cannot run any
code in C++ on that data.
So this is good as stuck.
Well done, we put it in input, but
I can't then display it somewhere else.
I can't add an exclamation mark to it.
If it were a number,
I can't change the number 7 to 8.
I cannot run or execute any code in
C++ on that list of elements that
I want to display and
I want to make dynamic.
I want to make changeable the content,
can't touch it.
So, goal two,
enable users to see the content,
change the content they see,
sorry, but problem.
Step two is impossible with our
original approach to step one.
HTML was a one-time display,
can't change that data, it was done.
DOM, yes, can display data but
can't run code on it.
We can't run code on it to change it.
We have to use what everybody together.
>> JavaScript.
>> Yeah, nice, exactly.
We have to use JavaScript to create and
save content.
Posh name data, even posher name, state.
State you can think of as being,
well, it's just all the same.
But it's all the information
about what's being displayed.
If you're in Excel and you tap a cell,
right, and that opens,
double tap a cell, start writing,
that has data associated with that action.
The data is cell is now focused, true.
Versus when you weren't tapped on it,
cell focused, false.
So every single thing, that's why states
probably more general term than data,
but they're all the same.
Data, state, and/or content are all
the underlying things you're trying to
represent as pixels on the page.
But the DOM has it, but
you can't run code to change it.
We have to go to JavaScript to save,
create data content,
and then have the ability
to run code to change it.
And there ain't nowhere else we
can do it in the web browser.